Event-based feature extraction (MQTT) (#67)
cobaltcore-dev/cortex: docs/adrs/001-event-based-feature-extraction.md

Architecture Decision Record 001

---

# Event-Based Feature Extraction

> ## Background

Reviewer: Would be nice to use the TAM schema for the diagram

Author: Sure, maybe this would be a good follow-up for this PR? I liked the idea that github can display mermaid diagrams out of the box, thus we don't have to include images. But im open to your idea

```mermaid
graph TB

> subgraph Syncer[Syncer Service]

Reviewer: Out of scope for this PR.. but would be nice to rename the services (discuss offline)

Author: Happy to discuss

- Added task queue and controller logic or use additional framework that needs to be maintained
- Need to consider execution waiting times (delays) and priorities
- If implemented with golang also needs a shared kv-storage or message queue, similar to option 1
- Highest change effort, requires the most rebuilding

Pros:
- Task handling automated by queue, tasks are spawned on the fly as needed
- Generic task configuration, e.g. execute task A every 30 sec while task B every 10 min
- Separation between periodic task and triggered tasks

### Implementation Option 4: Keep As-Is

We accept that we are somewhat outdated as the syncer runs "only" once every 1 minute. This option needs to be considered, as it is unclear if the optimization is needed at the moment.

Cons:
- No potential performance improvement, risk of inconsistencies with features that need to be timely
- No support for future logic like "scheduler spawned VM" --> "monitor VM in OpenStack" --> "spawned" --> "resync"

Pros:
- No change effort
- No additional services introduced into the architecture that need to be maintained
- Current service isolation persists

## Decision and Consequences

> Among the available options, option 1 was chosen. As an implementation variant for now, mqtt will be chosen. This also means that the mqtt broker will become mandatory. Option 4 should be conceptually investigated further while we move forward with an iterative, learning-by-doing approach.

Reviewer: It is not option 4, but option 3 which is considered long term.
Could also rephrase a bit

```suggestion
Among the available options, **Option 1: Message Broker** was chosen as the immediate solution. This approach allows us to move forward with minimal disruption to the current architecture while addressing the need for event-driven design. MQTT will be used as the message broker, making it a mandatory component of the system.

However, **Option 3: Generic Distribution Task Pipeline** is recognized as a more robust and scalable long-term solution. While it offers significant flexibility and automation, it is currently considered overkill due to its high complexity and the substantial effort required for implementation.
As the system evolves and the demand for more advanced task handling grows, we will re-evaluate the design (e.g., **Option 3**) when it becomes necessary.
```
